But the press relations with the Union? What's
that? Who were some of the press and journalists
who sided with the seamen or helped them
propaganda-wise? How was Heywood Broon? Oh,
Heywood Broon was very good. He was very good in
labor generally. I just for the moment can't
remember what he wrote about the NMU, about the
seamen. I remember once he gave quite a boost to the
Daily Worker. He recommended that everyone who
wanted to keep informed should read the New York
Times and the Daily Worker, those two papers. And
he was writing for another paper.
That's quite interesting. In the 1920s, how many
people were you familiar with? who were in the
generation of the 1920s besides that hung around
with the John Reed crowd. How's that? Who were some
other personalities whom you were familiar with
when you were a journalist in the 20s and in the 30s?
Ezra Pound or Faulkner or Hemingway or any of these
personalities? I didn't know Hemingway. One of my
very good friends on the paper who died, Joe North,
knew Hemingway very well from Spain. I was in Spain
too, but after Hemingway was out. Well, when did
you go to Spain? I was the last American reporter of
any kind in Madrid.
I got there at the
The very end of, let's see, the end of, probably the
last day of February, or the first of March, 1939,
when the war was lost. But I'd been fighting to get
over there for some time. And finally the decision
was, in the paper, well, even though whether
there's any chance of winning the war or not, we
should be there. Because on the surface, the war
seemed lost, but if it could hang on, the
international situation might possibly change,
you see. Anyhow, Hemingway was already out, and
I got to Madrid.
First,
it was very difficult to get into Spain.
Air France used to have a plane flying from
Toulouse to Barcelona, then to Valencia. then to
Alicante, and then to Oran in Algeria. But it had
cut out the three Spanish stations. It said it
would fly direct to Oran, and sometimes there'd be
a flight from Oran then to Alicante and back. Well,
I took a chance. It was a sheer gamble. I flew from
Toulouse to Oran. There I,
the representative of Air France there was a young
Englishman. He also represented Cook's Tours.
You know about that. And he said to me, no chance of
getting on the plane to Iran. We're booked for the
next two flights. There are two flights a week. And
no chance. Well, I sized him up. I talked to him a
little. I found he was a rather lonely,
disgruntled young man. He was unhappy on his job. I
told him that I was a little lonely, and I would like
to have a drink with him. It lasted for hours. And in
the morning, he told me at the end, be sure to be at
the office at 8 o'clock in the morning. And he
pushed me in ahead of some people who were
screaming, indignantly. So I got to Alicante,
and all that was left of the Popular Front then was
the Communist Party. The others had deserted.
The anarchists had went with the fifth column. uh
the uh the uh left the left socialists supported
the government yes no i would say no the left
socialists like the green uh and uh del vallo uh
state pat i was incorrect to saying that the
communists were the only one but they were the they
were the only big organized force behind behind
the the government well after three days in uh in
alicante which is in southern Spain, I got a ride, a
hitchhike, to Valencia. After four days in
Valencia, I got another ride to Madrid.
When I got to Madrid at noon, I was told that the
fifth column would strike any minute was there.
You may have heard of the fifth column. There was a
Spanish general named Mola, a fascist general,
who once said earlier in the war, we have four
columns marching on Madrid and we have a fifth
column in Madrid which will strike when we come
there. Well, that fifth column that night rose at
midnight. The next morning, I went down to the I was
staying in a
certain house. I went down and there was only one,
it was Monday, only one paper was published on
Monday. It was the anarchist paper. It was filled
with the fifth column manifestos.
And the anarchists were on that side. Their theory
was that that we'll get rid of the communists, then
we'll make a revolution. Well, some of them
believed that, but the leaders knew what they were
doing. Eventually, after the Fifth Column won,
they turned things over to Franco without firing a
shot. Real treachery. Well, anyhow, I went down to
the Mundo Brera, which is the organ of the
Communist Party, And it was guarded by enemy
troops. But I decided to go inside anyhow, because
I knew that the fighting would go on. And I walked
right into the trap quite consciously. And so our
building was under siege, machine guns rattling
off the walls.
cutting into the sandbags at the windows, and our
boys were shooting back. So after
some days there, we were... In the first days, our
side was winning. The
government forces had recaptured... the the
government buildings the ministry buildings
franco franco made an attack but he was pushed back
by an army made up dominated by communists and then
then things changed an anarchist regiment came in
from guadalajara and the the tide turned against
against the government forces.
So we had to evacuate Monroe Borough. It was a big
stone building, but we went then into the still
stronger building, the party headquarters.
After two days there, that had to be given up.
I was with a group of
five other people who were doing, four men and a
woman, who had been doing radio work behind the
fascist lines. And we were arrested. They almost
shot us there as we got out in front of a great wall.
There were about 20 fifth columnists there,
running around like crazy guys with Tommy guns. It
seemed a complete confusion, lack of
organization. One of them suddenly threw his gun
down on us with a lot of curses, but the man beside
him jerked it up. Well, that was a tense moment, you
can imagine. And we were taken to the Seguridad
police headquarters and held there. first
interrogated for some hours in an
upper floor in the press office. Then we were put in
a cell for the condemned. Well, I don't want to go
into all that detail. It was a pretty grim place
there, a very tiny little place with a cement floor
and a bloody floor where other prisoners had been,
wounded men who had been taken out and shot.
There was a German,
an Italian, a Hungarian, and a Frenchman. And in a
neighboring cell, we could see her sometimes at a
window, was a Portuguese young woman who called
herself Belgian for security reasons because
they knew she was Portuguese. She would just go out
like that, you see. because Portugal had a fascist
regime. So, well, this is outside of your story. I
don't know if you want any more of this. This is
fine. So,
the last day looked like our last day because we
weren't fed. The food, incidentally, was very
simple. Once a day, A guard would throw in what they
called a bacalao, which is half a codfish, raw, and
salt. You take two or three mouthfuls and your
palate's burning. No water with it. And a small
roll. I broke a bridgework on the roll. It was so
stale.
Then we'd have to pound and scream for Agua, and
we'd finally get her. But there was one guard who
was rather human. At first, the worst guard would
poke his head in and say, no Agua. But you'd keep on
pounding and yelling, and finally the guard who
was somewhat human would take us one by one to the
washroom to get Agua. Well, finally, they had
stolen my money, the guards. I managed to hide some
of my clothes. But they hadn't, for some reason,
taken my passport or my fountain pen or my
notebook. So I said to my friends, let's send
telegrams, write telegrams to our ambassadors.
And mention the names of the most important people
you can think of as though they were your friends.
They won't transmit the telegrams, but possibly
this will deter them, you know, what they want to
do, because it looked as though they were to be shot
that day. And it worked. That is, we gave them to a
guard, and I was taken up to the upper office,
interrogated. Now, my Spanish was very bad. I
decided not to use it at all. I said I only knew
American. They tried to ask me where I was staying
and where my baggage was. They talked a little
French and Spanish, imitated a man lifting
baggage and so forth. But I only knew American.
Then they brought in a cop who spoke in English,
London English. And I'd interviewed him when he
was a prisoner of the government side. He had been
liberated by the
victory of the fifth column. Well, I had nothing
left in my bag, but I just had to use what I had, which
was nothing. And I told him I only knew American,
not London talk. But it didn't work. But they took
me out. Two cops. Amateurs they were, cops. And put
their fingers to my throat, meaning it's the death
sign. I'd better tell them where I live. So I took
them to the embassy. I knew where it was. I hadn't
been there. When I got there, they were very angry.
They said, Abakadoa, very angry. I said, no, no. So
I hollered at them to ring the bell. There was a gate
and... a wall of masonry, an iron gate, and behind
that, 25 or 30 feet away, was the big embassy
building. When I hollered him to push the button,
he immediately, his finger automatically
pressed it. Well, the first man who came was a
porter who, it turned out, was no good. He was with
the fascists. But I wouldn't let them ask him to
talk. I'd holler louder than they did. He went back
for his chief, and the chief was a wonderful guy. He
was a Basque, knew English perfectly. He was a
custodian. Roosevelt had taken all the diplomats
out. As he said himself after, Spain was my
greatest mistake. That's recorded by Ambassador
Bowers in the book he wrote 14 years later.
Roosevelt told him that was his greatest mistake.
It was a terrible mistake because it helped to
bring on the World War. And you see, denying the
right of closing America's ports to the shipment
of munitions, which the Spaniards had the money to
pay for. So
we got there, and finally the custodian came.
Fortunately, he was in. If he hadn't been in, he
said, you wouldn't be alive now. And the argument
went on for maybe 10 or 15 minutes, shouting on each
side. And
he described me as a tremendously important
journalist. I certainly didn't, which was an
exaggeration. I didn't look the part. I hadn't
shaved for a long time, and clothes were dirty. And
finally I said, he was exhausted and he was drawing
his, trying to recover his strength and I said, I'm
very cold and sick. I wasn't sick, but I was cold and
I'm hungry. I just want to get inside the wall out of
the wind. Well,
another argument started and finally he talked
them down and I was to go inside the wall.
Naturally, I didn't stay there. I was set for the
door as fast as I could. He played football
interference, tried to block them. They knocked
him aside. But I had the door open. It was a very
heavy door, and I was going in when they grabbed me.
I pulled them in with me. And so then they were
scared. What would happen to them? One of them put
his finger to his own throat if he didn't take me
back. He got regrets, but impossible. And a
little sort of an albister burlesque, a little
interruption here. As I got in, I was Joe Kennedy,
John Kennedy's oldest brother, who died after he
was in an airplane accident during the war. he came
to me and he asked me a stupid question. What's the
difference between the Bolsheviks and the
Communists? You know, as soon as I, when I was safe,
suddenly I began to feel very all in. And before
that, you know, excitement and nerve kept you up,
but I was in no mood to argue. But, and he told me
that, he explained the difference was that the
Communists favor a bloody revolution. And the
socialists don't. This was in the embassy? Well, I
just said to him, their bodies were picked up in
front of this embassy. Who started the blood? I
said, in the fifth column, one of the leaders is a
right-wing socialist. It was true. There was
division in the Socialist Party. But the
communists didn't start it. But anyhow, the
custodian... intervened and he said, please
excuse Mr. Shields, my wife wants to give him some
deed. Afterwards he said to me, I don't know what
this young man is doing here, he says he can write
but he can't write. I found out afterwards from my
friends in touch with the embassy and he was
attached to the embassy in France and that he was
there to negotiate with the fifth column on behalf
of his father, who was then an ambassador in
London, and working with Chamberlain with the
appeasement crowd. Roosevelt finally broke with
him and had to drop him.
Well, that's sort of aside from the story, but what
I did was immediately I persuaded the custodian to
go to the Seguridad and appealed for the safety of
the men I left behind, and he did it. He intervened
very vigorously. As he told me, he had no authority
to do it. After all, he was only a custodian, not a
diplomat.
But it worked. I was told afterwards by one of the
men, a Balderian in Balderia, that they were taken
before a machine gun for execution two hours after
I left. And then, before the shots were fired, a
policeman ran up and said, the orders are changed.
Then they were transmitted to Valencia also. I
didn't see them there. And they were almost shot
when Franco came in, but somehow or other they were
very clever, they took themselves out of it. The
Italian comrade was shot, he was taken back to
Italy and executed, but the German The German told
the felonist, the stupid Spanish fascist
representative, that he came from Lubbock, which
he said is a free city, it's not part of the Reich.
Well, in the Middle Ages it was brought to the
Hanseatic League of Mercantile Cities, you know.
But they didn't know any better. And they didn't
shoot him and kept him seven years. He got
tuberculosis, but finally he was sent home. He
became a well-known author on novels and
decorated afterwards. I met him four years ago. I
had a very nice meeting with him in Germany.
Well, that's sort of off the National Maritime
Union.
Back to the union itself, back to the National
Maritime Union, how long did you cover them for the
daily worker, or the waterfront? Well, I should
say, through
the 40s, I did other things too, but it was, it took a
good, it was something I gave major attention to.
Then I was sent to Pittsburgh to a series of trials
of communist leaders in Pittsburgh.
And two people got a total of 25 years, but in two
different trials, both state and federal. But all
the cases were thrown out. by the Supreme Court
eventually. But the trials dragged on. One trial
lasted nine months. There are dramatic moments in
trials, but most of it's very boresome, sitting
there.
But
someone had to do it. It was a job that had to be done.
And I could do it.
I like the waterfront work. When you were covering
the waterfront, what do you consider to be some of
your more important stories that you wrote?
Well,
there was a strike in 1946 that was quite
important. There were a wave of strikes. going on
at that time. Incidentally, I wasn't only on the
waterfront. I also covered the steel strike in the
same year, different time of the year. See, after
the war,
labor struck back, especially the progressive
forces in labor initiated. Not the
top leaders like Bill Green, William Green, of the
miners, a very floppy personality. There
was also one
very exciting strike I reported. It was a
waterfront strike of a kind, a shipyard strike in
Chester. The Sun Oil Company owned a big shipyard
there. It was a violent strike. I saw two men killed
in front of my eyes. One firetruck ran into the
picket line, killed him, just ran over him. That
was pretty crude tactics.
But it was a fighting strike. The shipyard
workers, 4,000, had the help of 600 tanker seamen
employed also by the Sun Oil Company in tankers not
far away. That
was in the winter strike that led to the formation
of the National Maritime Union. So they came and
threw their muscles and their fighting spirit
into the fight with the shipyard workers.
It was very exciting. They
stopped a line of scabs led by goons, gangsters
armed with lead pipes, and won that battle.
Really, the bodies were dropped. all around the
place. And it's when the other side was losing that
it brought in the fire truck.
They brought in cops with tear gas, but that didn't
win. With
the National Maritime Union,
when in— Well, I should say that that— That phase of
the—that
was the most exciting story, that
particular front of
the winter seaman strike. You know, there was a
long winter strike that lasted all winter. I was
also in Baltimore during that strike. There was a
wonderful leader down there. I'll show you his
picture. Patty Whalen, you may have heard of him.
Yes, I
have. A very well-known artist. She did this. He
afterwards became head of the CIO in Baltimore. He
was a marine engineer and during the warship was
torpedoed.
Did you have any contacts with Paddy Whelan in
1935? With who? Did you have any earlier contacts
with Paddy Whelan? Yeah, well I met him earlier,
but I didn't know him well until after that we
became very good friends. When he came to New York
he came to see me. Did you have any contacts with the
ISU pilot? Oh. Any of the editors or the reporters
there? No. Well, I
had some contact. I was up in the office a couple
times, two or three times I remember. Did you ever
do any work for them? No, no. Did the Daily Worker
ever help them to publish their newspaper?
Well, indirectly, yes, because I think the
reporter we had on the waterfront those days did
some writing for it. I'm not positive, but I have
that impression. And they had the active moral
support of the people associated with the daily
worker, of course. See, the waterfront... The
leadership of the
CM at that time was,
much of it was communist.
In your opinion, how long did the communist state
have a major influence on the National Maritime
Union? And when did they start to lose their power
in the Union?
The decisive thing in Loss of Power was when
all known communists, and I would say not only
communists, but most active militants, were
dropped from the maritime roles by the
Coast Guard, the Coast Guard had charge of that.
Curran, right after he turned, gave a list of
names, you see, to the
Coast Guard, and they couldn't sell any more. That
was probably started in 49.
Then the government acted too. We had a very able
guy, Ferdinand C. Smith, the
Secretary-Treasurer of the Union, a black man, a
Jamaican. He was already deported, and Kern was
behind that. He was a communist, a good speaker,
very influential among the seamen. And
it was a persistent drive. And then, you see, Phil
Murray had joined the Cold War himself, actually,
in 1947. And he
threw out weight he could against the the
progressive forces, not only communists,
progressive forces on the waterfront and in other
unions.
You said earlier that Curran turned. When, in your
opinion, did he turn his leadership? What? You
said earlier that Curran, after Curran had
turned. When, in your opinion, do you think he
turned from being a progressive laborer? The open
turning was seen as early as 1946. Some people who
knew him better claimed that they saw signs
earlier. In 1946,
Curran broke up the Committee for Maritime Unity.
I don't know if you've heard of that or not. It was a
joint agreement with the International Long
Showmen and Warehousemen's Union led by Harry
Bridges. to—for United Action East and West Coast
Maritime Unions. And Kern walked out of it, pulled
the National Maritime Union out of it, which was a
dirty—really a treacherous blow.
That was open turning, yes. But he had been
insidiously working against Smith and others
earlier.
But it was not done so openly that you could be made
an issue. Perhaps it should have been, I don't
know. Did
you ever know Harry Bridges? Who? Harry Bridges.
Yes, I know Harry. Incidentally, I'll show you
something.
What were your impressions of Harry Bridges as a
labor leader?
Offhand, I'd say the best trade union leader the
United States has seen since the days of William Z.
Foster,
who led the Great Steel Strike and organized the
packinghouse workers. Did Bridges ever talk to
you about Joe Curran? No, no. No, I didn't know
Harry very intimately. But
I liked him very much and respected him. We had met,
and I covered a number of press conferences with
him and so forth. Did you know Jack Lawrenson? Yes.
And what were your impressions of him? Well,
I would say just fair. He didn't impress me
greatly, no. In the National Maritime Union, who
do you think was the most dynamic leaders in that
union? Who were?
Well, I'd say Joe Stack was one of them.
Lucky
Myers, McKenzie.
McKenzie was another vice president.
What about, how dynamic a leader was Ferdinand
Smith? Well, of course, Ferdinand Smith, yes,
yes, yes. By all means, I... Do you think that it was
a good idea for these members to challenge Curran
toward the end of the war in 45 and 46? Well, they
didn't—I don't know that—the war was over in 46. In
45, I don't think he was challenged, so I don't know
it. And in 46, There wasn't an active challenge,
as I recall. What about in Joe Stack's case? What?
What about in Joe Stack's case? Well, yeah, that
was in 1947, yes, when Kern had Joe Stack expelled,
yes. Very dirty job. I
think I was away at the time. I forget where now.
Anyhow, I wasn't in on that
convention.
Do you think, after the attack at Pearl Harbor,
that organized laborers no strike pledge? Was
that a good idea? No strike pledge? The principle
was a good idea. I think sometimes it was carried
out too inflexibly. There
were some cases where employers took advantage of
it and imposed very terrible conditions. For
instance, I'm thinking of... of coal operators
who had bad conditions on the ground, you know, men
working in water in very dangerous conditions.
Though
the miners in such cases sometimes did have
strikes, you see.
Why do you think John L. Lewis changed his position
so radically during the war? Well, that's hard to
say. He had
big differences with Louis, I mean with
Roosevelt. You see, Louis, as I said, changed his
tactics, but his personality hadn't changed so
much. Louis was a man who wanted power, and
he wanted more recognition from Roosevelt than
Roosevelt was willing to give him.
He wanted a lot of recognition.
After the war,
what was one of the, in your opinion, some of the
reasons that brought about this break between
Bridges and Curran, particularly with the CMU?
Were there any ideological reasons or incidents?
There was a difference of policy there.
Torn took a very bad position. What was that?
Against the Committee for Maritime Unity. He took
it for bad reasons, I think. In other words, he was
moving over to a policy of collaboration with the
class enemy rather than struggle with it.
After the war was over... What's that? After the
war was over, why did Bridges want to continue the
no-strike pledge? Did you ever talk to him about
that? No, I don't know. I really don't know.
How can I answer that? When did you... What? When
did you first become associated with the
Communist Party?
Well, I became an open member in 36, but I had worked
with the party for a long time before. I'd been on
the paper even though not a member of the party at
that time. It's not a compulsory condition, you
see.
And how long did this continue, your relationship
with the party? How long did it continue? To the
present? Oh, yes. Ideologically, have you ever
had any difficulty at times? How do you mean? Have
you ever had any problems or disagreements with
the party?
Not basic ideological differences. I disagreed
with some things that Barter was trying to do. For
instance? Well,
I disagreed with his idea that you could,
that you might say the lamb would lie down together
peacefully. In other words, that the American
monopolies would work with labor after the war. I
just couldn't see that. completely alien to my
experience. Are there any other instances or
incidents that you can remember, particularly in
your career as a journalist, in respect to the
waterfront and the maritime labor movement? Yes.
Not at hand right now. I can't remember them, no.
What did you consider to be your greatest piece of
journalism, or the single piece of—part of your
life that you're the most proud of? It's hard to
say. There were a lot of—I
suppose the Spanish
War experience would be a tough one, perhaps.
piece of reporting at home. There
would be a couple lynching stories I reported that
were
very interesting. And then I spent a month in Texas
in 1953 investigating the McCarthyite oil
barons. I got a series of interviews. I had ten
features following each other week by week. We had
a Sunday worker at that time.
I didn't tell them I was with a daily worker. I just
said, I'm a good American. I want to know what
you're doing and tell everyone about it. Did you
ever come up against any... Any problems,
particularly during the McCarthy era? During
what? During the McCarthy era? Were you ever
harassed by the government? In Texas or
elsewhere? Anywhere.
Well...
Harassed, yes, but that's something I could
carry. In Texas, I mean... Earl Brown was in prison
on a passport case at Roosevelt after his
community sentence.
While he was in prison, I was sent to Wichita, his
hometown, to get stories about his boyhood there
and his youth. I got a series of eight articles.
I talked to a lot of people who had known him. The
last one I talked to was his baseball captain.